Update README with getting started and design (#20)
rturner3/spire-mysql-demo: README.md

and connection encryption in MySQL via mutual-TLS (mTLS), deployed on Kubernetes. This project assumes readers to have 
basic knowledge of the following technologies and concepts:

1. [SPIFFE](https://spiffe.io/) and [SPIRE](https://github.com/spiffe/spire)
2. [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/)
3. [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/)
4. [Transport Layer Security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security)

## [Getting Started](#getting-started)

This section guides deploying and setting up components involved in this project on a Kubernetes cluster.
Refer [design](#design) for details on the components involved.

### Prerequisites

1. `kubectl` is installed and available on the PATH: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/ 
2. Kubernetes cluster is configured with `kubectl` and `kubectl context` is set to use this cluster
3. `curl` is installed and available on the PATH: https://everything.curl.dev/get

### Deploy and Setup

Deploy SPIRE server and SPIRE agent in the `spire` namespace on the cluster.
The script also creates necessary registrations in SPIRE server.
```

> ./01-deploy-spire.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./01-setup-spire.sh
```
Renamed based on your PR suggestion 😄

```

Deploy MySQL server along with a persistent volume in the `mysql` namespace on the cluster
```
./02-deploy-mysql.sh
```

In a separate terminal, start port forwarding to MySQL server pod
```

> kubectl -n mysql port-forward pod/mysql-0 3306:3306

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl -n mysql port-forward service/mysql 3306:3306
```
1. On second look, probably cleaner to do based on the service rather than pod. I'll update the script comments as well to suggest that
2. I guess we should agree on what port to use locally 😄

```

> Setup MySQL users and database, by connecting to the MySQL server via port-forwarding.

Reviewer: Should we add a note about how this needs to be done within a couple minutes before the MySQL server cert expires? Or maybe what would be cleaner is if we change the default TTL for the certs in SPIRE on the `main` branch and then just have a separate branch we deploy out of which uses the lower TTL for demonstration purposes.

Author: I like the idea, we can change the default TTL to a few hours, and use 2min for demo in a separate branch

```
./03-setup-mysql.sh
```

Deploy `sample-service` in the default namespace.
```
./04-deploy-service.sh
```

### Verify DB Access using Sample Service

This section verifies DB access via mTLS using Sample Service.

In a separate terminal, start port forwarding to the `sample-service` 
```

> kubectl port-forward service/sample-service  8888:8888

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl port-forward service/sample-service 8888:8888
```

```

Use `curl` to verify the `GET /api/v1/users` endpoint on `localhost:8888`. The output should contain sample user data which was created
during MySQL DB setup.
```
curl -s -X GET http://localhost:8888/api/v1/users
```

Use `curl` to create a new user 
```
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:8888/api/v1/users -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"Name":"David"}'
```

Verify the newly created user is showing up in the `GET /api/v1/users` request
```
curl -s -X GET http://localhost:8888/api/v1/users
```

Verify the DB connection made by `sample-service` in the MySQL server general log. It should have a `Connect` log message from 
`spire-mysql-client` user (representing sample-service) connecting to the `spiredemo` DB using SSL/TLS.
```

> kubectl exec -it mysql-0 -n mysql -c mysql -- cat /var/lib/mysql/general.log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl -n mysql exec -it mysql-0 -c mysql -- cat /var/lib/mysql/general.log
```
nit: keep `-n` option first to be consistent with other `kubectl` commands in the README

```

### Cleanup 

Cleanup the environment using the cleanup script
```
./cleanup.sh
```

## [Design](#design)

### Architecture

![Architecture](./docs/img/architecture.png)

> MySQL server uses its X.509-SVIDs as server certificate and encryption whereas clients use the X.509-SVIDs to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MySQL server uses its X.509-SVID as a TLS server certificate, and clients use the X.509-SVIDs as
```
nit: some suggested grammar/wording tweaks

> authenticate to the MySQL server. SPIRE Server and SPIRE Agent are deployed on the Kubernetes Cluster along

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client certificates to authenticate to the MySQL server. SPIRE Server and SPIRE Agent are deployed on the Kubernetes Cluster along
```

> with registration entries created in the  SPIRE Server. MySQL is deployed with an init-container that fetches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with registration entries created in the SPIRE Server. MySQL is deployed with an init-container that fetches an
```

X.509-SVID from SPIRE agent and writes to a tmpfs volume shared with the MySQL server container.

> Upon init, MySQL server container reads the X.509-SVID from the tmpfs volume for SSL configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon init, the MySQL server container reads the X.509-SVID from the tmpfs volume for TLS configuration.
```

> The sample-service also fetches its X.509 SVID from SPIRE and uses it to authenticate to MySQL server and  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sample-service also fetches its X.509-SVID from SPIRE and uses it to authenticate to MySQL server over mTLS.
```

> to verify MySQL server's certificate (mTLS). The design also uses SPIRE CredentialComposer plugin to configure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It uses the trust bundle distributed by SPIRE Agent to verify MySQL server's certificate during the TLS handshake.

The design also uses a SPIRE CredentialComposer plugin to enrich
```

> X.509-SVIDs issued to sample-service have a unique Subject with Common Name - `/C=US/O=SPIRE/CN=spire-mysql-client`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
X.509-SVIDs issued to the sample-service with a Subject with a unique Common Name - `/C=US/O=SPIRE/CN=spire-mysql-client`,
```

> thereby mapping this service's identity to the user created in MySQL -

Reviewer: We should also note that this is needed because MySQL doesn't know how to do SPIFFE authentication using verification of SPIFFE IDs in the URI SAN, i.e. default X.509-SVIDs issued by SPIRE don't work for this case

`CREATE USER 'spire-mysql-client' REQUIRE SUBJECT '/C=US/O=SPIRE/CN=spire-mysql-client'` 

### Certificate Auto-Rotation

![Rotation](./docs/img/rotation.png)

For security reasons, SPIRE server is configured to issue X.509-SVIDs with a relatively low TTL. This poses a 

> challenge wrt MySQL server as it constantly requires updating the server SSL configuration with new X.509-SVID 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
challenge with MySQL server certificate rotation as the server TLS configuration frequently needs to be updated to use the newest X.509-SVID 
```

> content from SPIRE agent. To achieve auto-rotation, MySQL server pod has a custom sidecar container called 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from SPIRE agent. To achieve auto-rotation, the MySQL server pod has a custom sidecar container called 
```

> TLS reloader, which is responsible for rotating the MySQL server's SSL configuration. It does so by fetching 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLS reloader, which is responsible for rotating the MySQL server's TLS configuration. It does so by fetching 
```

> X.509-SVID updates from SPIRE agent, writes them to shared tmpfs volume and executes `ALTER INSTANCE RELOAD TLS` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
X.509-SVID updates from SPIRE agent, writing them to a pod tmpfs volume and executing the `ALTER INSTANCE RELOAD TLS` 
```

> query on the MySQL server, to force MySQL server to reload  the SSL configuration from disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
query on the MySQL server. This query forces the MySQL server to reload its TLS configuration from disk.
```

# MySQL mTLS Authentication using SPIRE

Demonstration of using SPIRE-issued X.509-SVIDs in MySQL database and clients, providing client authentication
and connection encryption in MySQL via mutual-TLS (mTLS), deployed on Kubernetes. This project assumes readers to have 
basic knowledge of the following technologies and concepts:

1. [SPIFFE](https://spiffe.io/) and [SPIRE](https://github.com/spiffe/spire)

> 2. [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/)

Reviewer: nit: starting each numbered bullet with `1. ` rather than the next number is a little easier to maintain

3. [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/)
4. [Transport Layer Security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security)

## [Getting Started](#getting-started)

This section guides deploying and setting up components involved in this project on a Kubernetes cluster.
Refer [design](#design) for details on the components involved.

### Prerequisites

1. `kubectl` is installed and available on the PATH: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/ 
2. Kubernetes cluster is configured with `kubectl` and `kubectl context` is set to use this cluster

> 3. `curl` is installed and available on the PATH: https://everything.curl.dev/get

Reviewer: I think curl.se is the official website for cURL, referred to in the source code repo on GitHub: https://github.com/curl/curl#website

Maybe we should link to the official site?

basic knowledge of the following technologies and concepts:

1. [SPIFFE](https://spiffe.io/) and [SPIRE](https://github.com/spiffe/spire)
1. [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/)
1. [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/)
1. [Transport Layer Security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security)

## [Getting Started](#getting-started)

This section guides deploying and setting up components involved in this project on a Kubernetes cluster.
Refer [design](#design) for details on the components involved.

### Prerequisites

1. `kubectl` is installed and available on the PATH: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/ 
2. Kubernetes cluster is configured with `kubectl` and `kubectl context` is set to use this cluster
3. `curl` is installed and available on the PATH: https://curl.se/

### Deploy and Setup

Deploy SPIRE server and SPIRE agent in the `spire` namespace on the cluster.
The script also creates necessary registrations in SPIRE server.
```
./01-setup-spire.sh
```

Deploy MySQL server along with a persistent volume in the `mysql` namespace on the cluster
```
./02-deploy-mysql.sh
```

In a separate terminal, start port forwarding to MySQL server pod
```

> kubectl -n mysql port-forward service/mysql 3306:3306

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl -n mysql port-forward service/mysql 9999:3306
```
Doesn't match expectation of `03-setup-mysql.sh`

### Architecture

![Architecture](./docs/img/architecture.png)

MySQL server uses its X.509-SVID as TLS server certificate, and clients use the X.509-SVIDs as client certificates 
to authenticate to the MySQL server. SPIRE Server and SPIRE Agent are deployed on the Kubernetes Cluster along
with registration entries created in the SPIRE Server. MySQL is deployed with an init-container that fetches an
X.509-SVID from SPIRE agent and writes to a tmpfs volume shared with the MySQL server container.
Upon init, the MySQL server container reads the X.509-SVID from the tmpfs volume for SSL configuration.

The sample-service also fetches its X.509-SVID from SPIRE and uses it to authenticate to MySQL server over mTLS. 
It uses the trust bundle distributed by SPIRE Agent to verify MySQL server's certificate during the TLS handshake.

The design also uses SPIRE CredentialComposer plugin to enrich X.509-SVIDs issued to the sample-service 
with a `Subject` with a unique Common Name - `/C=US/O=SPIRE/CN=spire-mysql-client`,
thereby mapping this service's identity to the user created in MySQL -
`CREATE USER 'spire-mysql-client' REQUIRE SUBJECT '/C=US/O=SPIRE/CN=spire-mysql-client'`.

> This is needed because MySQL doesn't understand the default SPIFFE authentication sematics of verifying 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is needed because MySQL doesn't understand the default SPIFFE authentication semantics of verifying 
```

> the SPIFFE ID in `URI SAN` in X.509-SVIDs. Hence, customizing a unique `Subject` per workload enables use to configure MySQL 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the SPIFFE ID in the `URI SAN` in X.509-SVIDs. Hence, customizing a unique `Subject` per workload enables MySQL 
```

> with `Subject` based X.509 verification for authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to authenticate based on the X.509 `Subject` field.
```
